docs: Vault deployment (#1503)
edgelesssys/contrast: docs/docs/examples/vault.md

# Vault

**This tutorial guides you through deploying a Vault as a confidential deployment by using Contrast's built-in Vault support.**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Because the `workload-secret-seed` is derived from the associated `workloadSecretID`, any change to the `workloadSecretID` after the block device has been initialized will result in deriving an invalid encryption key, making the mounted block device undecryptable.

:::note[Inter-deployment communication]

The Contrast Coordinator issues mesh certificates after successfully validating workloads.
These certificates can be used for secure inter-deployment communication.
The Initializer sends an attestation report to the Coordinator, retrieves a service mesh certificate bound to it's provided public key, containing the certificate chain, as well as the current mesh CA cert.
The Initializer then writes them to a `volumeMount`, allowing to build up the secure mTLS connections based on the service mesh.
The received service mesh certificate also holds the certificate extension of the `workloadSecretID`, which is used to allow the authorization to a certain encryption key on the transit engine API.

:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This can be achieved by using the corresponding `workload-secret-id` annotation to directly overwrite the manifest with the required `workloadSecretID`.

### Connecting to the application

Other confidential containers can securely connect to the Vault server via the [Service Mesh](../components/service-mesh.md).
As previously noted, access to the Vault endpoint is restricted to peers that present a service mesh certificate valid under the currently set manifest.
While such a certificate enables mTLS-based communication with the Vault server, it doesn't, on its own, grant authorization to perform Vault-related operations.
Permissions for accessing secrets within Vault must be explicitly configured using the root token obtained during Vault initialization.
The configured `openbao-client` deployment is responsible for executing Vault-related operations, including initialization, secret creation, and sealing instructions.

For more information on the Vault management and administration, please follow the official [OpenBao documentation](https://openbao.org/docs/).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Vault implementations by default use a set of unseal keys derived from a master key, building up on `Shamir's Secret Sharing` scheme.
Further to auto-unseal Vaults, the process can be delegated to another already initialized Vault by using
an exposed [transit secrets engine API](https://openbao.org/api-docs/secret/transit/) as the unsealing mechanism.

## Transit secrets engine API of Contrast Coordinator
To automate the unsealing process in confidential deployments of Vault instances, the coordinator exposes a compatible transit secrets engine API on port 8200.
Vault deployments can be configured to integrate this transit engine to enable auto-unsealing,
ensuring immediate operational readiness and seamless integration within the secure Contrast environment.

### Secure endpoints with mutual TLS
All communication between the transit secrets engine API and Vault is secured through mutual TLS (mTLS), enforced by Contrast’s service mesh.
Only entities presenting a valid mesh-issued certificate—corresponding to the current state of the Contrast deployment—are trusted.

The Coordinator issues itself a valid certificate at the time of the transit secrets engine API call,

> while the Vault deployment obtains its certificate after successful validation by the mesh API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
while the Vault deployment obtains its certificate in the initialization phase, after attesting to the Coordinator.
```

### Role of `workloadSecretID`
To support persistence in the auto-unsealing process, the `workloadSecretID` is used to derive the encryption key utilized by the transit secrets engine. Beyond key derivation, the `workloadSecretID` also plays a critical role in authorization.

> Access to a specific encryption key via the transit secrets engine API is permitted only if the requested key name matches the `workloadSecretID` embedded in the corresponding certificate extension of the Contrast mesh certificate. This ensures that each entity is cryptographically bound to its own set of encryption keys within the engine.

Reviewer 2: Cryptographically bound? I'd rather say "workloads can only access transit engine secrets for their `workloadSecretID`".

For more details on how the workload secret is used, see [Workload

> Secrets](../architecture/secrets.md#workload-secrets).

Reviewer 2: Nit: line wrapping in this file is inconsistent - some lines are quite long with multiple sentences, and here we're breaking pretty early. 

I personally prefer no line wrapping, and one sentence per line. That makes future diffs easier and does not depend on editor settings.

Author: I fixed this line wrapping. I hope it's not overhead for reviewing now. To give you some guidance, the reworking mainly focused on the beginning until "Prerequisites" and the final part after "Deploy Vault". The middle part is rewrapping only besides the release generation. Sorry for not splitting this in two commits😅

## Prerequisites

- Installed Contrast CLI
- A running Kubernetes cluster with support for confidential containers, either on [AKS](../getting-started/cluster-setup.md) or on [bare metal](../getting-started/bare-metal.md)

## Steps to deploy Vault with Contrast

### Download the deployment files
The Vault deployment files are part of the Contrast release. You can download them by running:

```sh
curl -fLO https://github.com/edgelesssys/contrast/releases/latest/download/

> //TODO(jmxnzo): generate these

Reviewer 2: Still needs doing?

```sh
contrast generate --reference-values k3s-qemu-tdx deployment/
```
:::note[Missing TCB values]
On bare-metal TDX, `contrast generate` is unable to fill in the `MinimumTeeTcbSvn` and `MrSeam` TCB values as they can vary between platforms.
They will have to be filled in manually.
If you don't know the correct values use `ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff` and `000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000` respectively and observe the real values in the error messages in the following steps. This should only be done in a secure environment.
:::
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::note[Runtime class and Initializer]

The deployment YAML shipped for this demo is already configured to be used with Contrast.
A [runtime class](../components/runtime) `contrast-cc`
was added to the pods to signal they should be run as Confidential Containers. During the generation process,
the Contrast [Initializer](../components/overview.md#the-initializer) will be added as an init container to these
workloads. It will attest the pod to the Coordinator and fetch the workload certificates and the workload secret.

> Further, the deployment YAML is also configured with the Contrast [service mesh](../components/service-mesh.md).

Reviewer 2: That's not true, is it? The certificates are explicitly used by the Vault client and server.

Author: No, this was left-over when copying the chapter "_Generate policy annotations and manifest_" over from other docs.

The configured service mesh proxy provides transparent protection for the communication between
the Vault server and client.
:::

### Deploy the Coordinator

Deploy the Coordinator resource first by applying its resource definition:

```sh
kubectl apply -f deployment/coordinator.yml
```

### Set the manifest

Configure the Coordinator with a manifest. It might take up to a few minutes
for the load balancer to be created and the Coordinator being available.

```sh
coordinator=$(kubectl get svc coordinator -o=jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
echo "The user API of your Contrast Coordinator is available at $coordinator:1313"
contrast set -c "${coordinator}:1313" deployment/
```

The CLI will use the reference values from the manifest to attest the Coordinator deployment
during the TLS handshake. If the connection succeeds, it's ensured that the Coordinator
deployment hasn't been tampered with.

### Deploy Vault

Now that the Coordinator has a manifest set, which defines the Vault deployment as an allowed workload,
we can deploy the application:

```sh
kubectl apply -f deployment/
```

> :::note[Persistent workload secrets]
> 
> During the initialization process of the workload pod, the Contrast Initializer
> sends an attestation report to the Coordinator and receives a workload secret
> derived from the Coordinator's secret seed and the `workloadSecretID` specified in the
> manifest, and writes it to a secure in-memory `volumeMount`.
> 
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```
I don't think this note is relevant here - this page is not so much about workload secrets, and we're not even using the workload secret anywhere.

<!-- TODO(jmxnzo): revise this paragraph as soon as we support filesystem volumes everywhere -->
The Vault deployment is defined as a StatefulSet using the OpenBao Vault image, with a mounted block device for persistent storage.
A Contrast Initializer, running as an init container, uses the workload secret located at `/contrast/secrets/workload-secret-seed` to
generate an encryption key and initialize the block device as a LUKS-encrypted partition.
Before the Vault container starts, the Initializer opens the LUKS device using the generated key.
This unlocked device is then mounted by the Vault container and used as the backend storage volume.
For the Vault application, this process is entirely transparent, and the device behaves like a standard volume mount.
It’s important to clarify that the LUKS encryption of the block device is primarily a convenience feature, enabling persistent storage
at the filesystem level on confidential virtual machines.
The primary and security-relevant encryption mechanism remains Vault’s own sealing process, which provides cryptographic protection of

> secrets—even in the event that the underlying storage is compromised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
secrets—even if the underlying storage is compromised.
```

Because the `workload-secret-seed` is derived from the associated `workloadSecretID`,
any change to the `workloadSecretID` after the block device has been initialized will result in deriving an invalid encryption key,
making the mounted block device undecryptable.

:::note[Inter-deployment communication]

The Contrast Coordinator issues mesh certificates after successfully validating workloads.
These certificates can be used for secure inter-deployment communication.
The Initializer sends an attestation report to the Coordinator,
retrieves a service mesh certificate bound to it's provided public key, containing the certificate chain, as well as the current mesh CA cert.
The Initializer then writes them to a `volumeMount`, allowing to build up the secure mTLS connections based on the service mesh.
The received service mesh certificate also holds the certificate extension of the `workloadSecretID`,
which is used to allow the authorization to a certain encryption key on the transit engine API.

:::

The Vault's TCP listener is configured to accept connections only from mesh certificates issued under the current state of the service mesh CA,

> effectively restricting communication to attested Contrast deployments.

Reviewer 2: This should reflect that the CA trusted by Vault is the one which signed its (Vault's) own certificate, not the current one.

The Coordinator’s transit secrets engine API authorizes requests based on the `workloadSecretID`,
which is embedded in a certificate extension and must match the target endpoint.
As previously noted, updating the `workloadSecretID` after initializing the LUKS device will make it inaccessible,
due to a mismatch in the derived encryption key.
Therefore, it's critical to ensure that the `workloadSecretID` is correctly aligned with the intended endpoint

> specified in Vault’s sealing configuration before the first `contrast set` is executed.

Reviewer 2: I feel that this paragraph only repeats content from prior sections. It should either concisely introduce a new concept, or be removed.

### Connecting to the application

Other confidential containers can securely connect to the Vault server via the
[Service Mesh](../components/service-mesh.md).
As previously noted, access to the Vault endpoint is restricted to peers that present a service mesh certificate valid
under the currently set manifest. While such a certificate enables mTLS-based communication
with the Vault server, it doesn't, on its own, grant authorization to perform Vault-related operations.
Permissions for accessing secrets within Vault must be explicitly configured using the root token obtained during Vault initialization
The configured `openbao-client` deployment is responsible for executing Vault-related operations,
including initialization, secret creation, and sealing instructions.

For more information on the Vault management and administration, please follow the official [OpenBao documentation](https://openbao.org/docs/).

> ## Updating the deployment

Reviewer 2: I believe this section could be replaced with a demo snippet that restarts Vault and observes the auto-unsealing (e.g. `kubectl rollout restart` followed by `kubectl logs`).

Because the workload secret is derived from the `workloadSecretID` specified in the manifest—rather
than tied to an individual pod—the Contrast Initializer can deterministically regenerate the same key
upon pod restart and successfully unlock the previously initialized LUKS-encrypted device.

> As mentioned in the chapter [Deploy Vault](./vault.md#deploy-vault), when using encrypted block devices in Contrast,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the chapter [Deploy Vault](#deploy-vault), when using encrypted block devices in Contrast,
```

They will have to be filled in manually.
If you don't know the correct values use `ffffffffffff<!--  -->ffffffffffffffffffff` and `000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000` respectively and observe the real values in the error messages in the following steps. This should only be done in a secure environment.
:::
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::note[Runtime class and Initializer]

The deployment YAML shipped for this demo is already configured to be used with Contrast.
A [runtime class](../components/runtime) `contrast-cc`
was added to the pods to signal they should be run as Confidential Containers. During the generation process,
the Contrast [Initializer](../components/overview.md#the-initializer) will be added as an init container to these
workloads. It will attest the pod to the Coordinator and fetch the workload certificates and the workload secret.

Further, the deployment YAML is also configured with the Contrast [service mesh](../components/service-mesh.md).
The configured service mesh proxy provides transparent protection for the communication between

> the MySQL server and client.

Author: I prefer `Vault server and client ` here over the Coordinator, because it covers both of the Vault connections taking place. On the one hand, we have the Coordinator exposing the transit engine API, therefore acting as a Vault server instance and correspondingly the Vault `openbao-server `container making use of the API endpoints as a client. On the other hand, we have the Vault `openbao-server` container being the desired, unsealed Vault server instance, serving the `openbao-client` container to

For more information on the Vault management and administration, please follow the official [OpenBao documentation](https://openbao.org/docs/).

## Updating the deployment
Because the workload secret is derived from the workloadSecretID specified in the manifest—rather
than tied to an individual pod—the Contrast Initializer can deterministically regenerate the same key
upon pod restart and successfully unlock the previously initialized LUKS-encrypted device.

As mentioned in the chapter [Deploy Vault](./vault.md#deploy-vault), when using encrypted block devices in Contrast,
it's critical to ensure that the `workloadSecretID` remains consistent.
Any change to this value will prevent the Contrast Initializer from deriving the correct decryption key,
making the LUKS device inaccessible.

For example, after making changes to the deployment files, the runtime policies
need to be regenerated with `contrast generate` and the new manifest needs to be
set using `contrast set`.

```sh
contrast generate deployment/
contrast set -c "${coordinator}:1313" deployment/
```

The new deployment can then be applied by running:

```sh
kubectl rollout restart statefulset/openbao-server

> kubectl rollout restart deployment/openbao-client

Reviewer 3: The currently generated YAML in `sets.go` only contains a `StatefulSet` named `vault` with two containers in it. Is this about to change when you include the YAML in the release, or is this a mistake?

Author: Thanks for spotting, it was by mistake and will only be the vault `StatefulSet` as it is right now.

deployment hasn't been tampered with.

### Deploy Vault

Now that the Coordinator has a manifest set, which defines the Vault deployment as an allowed workload,
we can deploy the application:

```sh
kubectl apply -f deployment/
```
:::note[Persistent workload secrets]

During the initialization process of the workload pod, the Contrast Initializer
sends an attestation report to the Coordinator and receives a workload secret
derived from the Coordinator's secret seed and the `workloadSecretID` specified in the
manifest, and writes it to a secure in-memory `volumeMount`.

:::

The Vault deployment is defined as a StatefulSet using the OpenBao Vault image, with a mounted block device for persistent storage.
A Contrast Initializer, running as an init container, uses the workload secret located at `/contrast/secrets/workload-secret-seed` to
generate an encryption key and initialize the block device as a LUKS-encrypted partition.
Before the Vault container starts, the Initializer opens the LUKS device using the generated key.
This unlocked device is then mounted by the Vault container and used as the backend storage volume.

> For the Vault application, this process is entirely transparent, and the device behaves like a standard volume mount.

Reviewer 2: Please leave a TODO comment here to revise this paragraph as soon as we support filesystem volumes everywhere.

```

The CLI will verify the Coordinator via remote attestation using the reference values from a given manifest. This manifest needs
to be communicated out of band to everyone wanting to verify the deployment, as the `verify` command checks
if the currently active manifest at the Coordinator matches the manifest given to the CLI. If the command succeeds,
the Coordinator deployment was successfully verified to be running in the expected Confidential
Computing environment with the expected code version. The Coordinator will then return its
configuration over the established TLS channel. The CLI will store this information, namely the root
certificate of the mesh (`mesh-ca.pem`) and the history of manifests, into the `verify/` directory.
In addition, the policies referenced in the manifest history are also written into the same directory.

### Auditing the manifest history and artifacts

In the next step, the Coordinator configuration that was written by the `verify` command needs to be audited.
A user of the application should inspect the manifest and the referenced policies. They could delegate
this task to an entity they trust.

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this here.

### Connecting to the application

Other confidential containers can securely connect to the Vault server via the
[Service Mesh](../components/service-mesh.md).

> Any verified deployment with a valid Service Mesh cerrtificate is trusted by the Vault server application and thus can execute Vault-related operations

Reviewer 2: There's punctuation missing at the end of this line, and I think the meaning of `trust` could be clearer here: it's rather that the mesh certificate is a requirement to even talk to the Vault endpoint, but by itself it does not grant any permissions.
